---
title: Setting up SSH keys
heading: Setting up SSH keys
subtitle: Setting up SSH keys for secure communication with Git servers
description: Welcome to our Git course! In this course, you will learn how to use Git to track and manage changes to your source code projects.
author: Deepak Gangwar

tags: 
    - post
    - git
    - github
    - Git and Github course

date: 2023-02-26
layout: layouts/post.njk

# By default Eleventy will create the url /posts/2023-02-10 which looks wierd
# We also can't let it use the title or slugify as that would be a huge title
# So this is the correct way to provide urls if you want to have clean urls
permalink: /posts/git-course/M02-installing/L03-setting-ssh-keys/
---

# Setting up SSH keys for secure communication with Git servers

Created: January 2, 2023 4:06 PM
Module: 💿 Installing

(Set up credentials so you dont have to sign in every time)

Sure! Here is some information about setting up SSH keys for secure communication with Git servers:

### Why is it important:

- SSH keys are a secure way to authenticate with Git servers. They allow you to access your repositories without having to enter your username and password each time.
- Using SSH keys helps to protect your account from unauthorized access, as the keys are unique to your computer and cannot be easily copied or stolen.

### How to do it:

1. Generate an SSH key pair on your computer:
- Open a terminal window and enter the following command: **`ssh-keygen -t rsa -b 4096 -C "your_email@example.com"`**
- Press Enter to accept the default file location and name for the key pair.
- Enter a passphrase to protect the keys (optional, but recommended).

### Add the public key to your Git server:

- In the terminal, enter the following command to copy the contents of your public key: **`cat ~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub`**
- Go to your Git server (e.g. GitHub, GitLab) and navigate to your account settings.
- Under the "SSH and GPG keys" section, click the "New SSH key" button.
- Paste the contents of your public key into the "Key" field and give the key a descriptive title (e.g. "My computer").
- Click the "Add SSH key" button to save the key.

### Test the connection:

- In the terminal, enter the following command to test the connection: **`ssh -T git@your-git-server.com`**
- If the connection is successful, you will see a message like "Hi username! You've successfully authenticated, but GitHub does not provide shell access."

### Useful resources and links:

- GitHub documentation on generating SSH keys: **[https://docs.github.com/en/github/authenticating-to-github/generating-a-new-ssh-key-and-adding-it-to-the-ssh-agent](https://docs.github.com/en/github/authenticating-to-github/generating-a-new-ssh-key-and-adding-it-to-the-ssh-agent)**
- GitLab documentation on generating SSH keys: **[https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/ssh/README.html](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/ssh/README.html)**
- Atlassian documentation on using SSH keys with Bitbucket: **[https://confluence.atlassian.com/bit](https://confluence.atlassian.com/bit)**

### elaborate on the above point "Set up credentials so you dont have to sign in every time"

Certainly! When you set up SSH keys for secure communication with Git servers, you are creating a set of unique credentials that can be used to authenticate your access to the server. This eliminates the need to sign in with a username and password each time you want to access your repositories.

Setting up SSH keys involves generating a pair of keys (a public key and a private key) on your computer and adding the public key to your Git server account. The private key is stored on your computer and is used to authenticate your access to the server. The public key is stored on the server and is used to verify the authenticity of the private key.

Using SSH keys to authenticate with Git servers offers several benefits:

- It is more secure than using a username and password, as the keys are unique to your computer and cannot be easily copied or stolen.
- It is more convenient, as you do not have to enter your login credentials each time you access the server.
- It is more efficient, as the authentication process is automated and does not require additional server resources.

